It was a Sunday evening in London, gloomy, close, and stale. Maddening church bells of all degrees of dissonance,
sharp and flat, cracked and clear, fast and slow, made the brick-and-mortar echoes hideous. Melancholy streets,
in a penitential garb of soot, steeped the souls of the people who were condemned to look at them out of windows,
in dire despondency. In every thoroughfare, up almost every alley, and down almost every turning, some doleful bell
was throbbing, jerking, tolling, as if the Plague were in the city and the dead-carts were going round.
Everything was bolted and barred that could by possibility furnish relief to an overworked people. No pictures,
no unfamiliar animals, no rare plants or flowers, no natural or artificial wonders of the ancient world—all taboo
with that enlightened strictness, that the ugly South Sea gods in the British Museum might have supposed themselves
at home again. Nothing to see but streets, streets, streets. Nothing to breathe but streets, streets, streets.
Nothing to change the brooding mind, or raise it up. Nothing for the spent toiler to do, but to compare the monotony
of his seventh day with the monotony of his six days, think what a weary life he led, and make the best of
it—or the worst, according to the probabilities.
At such a happy time, so propitious to the interests of religion and morality, Mr Arthur Clennam, newly arrived from
Marseilles by way of Dover, and by Dover coach the Blue-eyed Maid, sat in the window of a coffee-house on Ludgate Hill.
Ten thousand responsible houses surrounded him, frowning as heavily on the streets they composed, as if they were every
one inhabited by the ten young men of the Calender’s story, who blackened their faces and bemoaned their miseries every
night. Fifty thousand lairs surrounded him where people lived so unwholesomely that fair water put into their crowded
rooms on Saturday night, would be corrupt on Sunday morning; albeit my lord, their county member, was amazed that they
failed to sleep in company with their butcher’s meat. Miles of close wells and pits of houses, where the inhabitants
gasped for air, stretched far away towards every point of the compass. Through the heart of the town a deadly sewer
ebbed and flowed, in the place of a fine fresh river. What secular want could the million or so of human beings whose
daily labour, six days in the week, lay among these Arcadian objects, from the sweet sameness of which they had no
escape between the cradle and the grave—what secular want could they possibly have upon their seventh day? Clearly
they could want nothing but a stringent policeman.
Mr Arthur Clennam sat in the window of the coffee-house on Ludgate Hill, counting one of the neighbouring bells,
making sentences and burdens of songs out of it in spite of himself, and wondering how many sick people it might
be the death of in the course of the year. As the hour approached, its changes of measure made it more and more
exasperating. At the quarter, it went off into a condition of deadly-lively importunity, urging the populace
in a voluble manner to Come to church, Come to church, Come to church! At the ten minutes, it became aware that the
congregation would be scanty, and slowly hammered out in low spirits, They won’t come, they won’t come, they won’t come!
At the five minutes, it abandoned hope, and shook every house in the neighbourhood for three hundred seconds,
with one dismal swing per second, as a groan of despair.
‘Thank Heaven!’ said Clennam, when the hour struck, and the bell stopped.
But its sound had revived a long train of miserable Sundays, and the procession would not stop with the bell,
but continued to march on. ‘Heaven forgive me,’ said he, ‘and those who trained me. How I have hated this day!’
There was the dreary Sunday of his childhood, when he sat with his hands before him, scared out of his senses
by a horrible tract which commenced business with the poor child by asking him in its title, why he was going to
Perdition?—a piece of curiosity that he really, in a frock and drawers, was not in a condition to satisfy—and which,
for the further attraction of his infant mind, had a parenthesis in every other line with some such hiccupping
reference as 2 Ep. Thess. c. iii, v. 6 & 7. There was the sleepy Sunday of his boyhood, when, like a military deserter,
he was marched to chapel by a picquet of teachers three times a day, morally handcuffed to another boy; and when he
would willingly have bartered two meals of indigestible sermon for another ounce or two of inferior mutton at his scanty
dinner in the flesh. There was the interminable Sunday of his nonage; when his mother, stern of face and unrelenting of
heart, would sit all day behind a Bible—bound, like her own construction of it, in the hardest, barest, and straitest boards,
with one dinted ornament on the cover like the drag of a chain, and a wrathful sprinkling of red upon the edges of the
leaves—as if it, of all books! were a fortification against sweetness of temper, natural affection, and gentle intercourse.
There was the resentful Sunday of a little later, when he sat down glowering and glooming through the tardy length of the day,
with a sullen sense of injury in his heart, and no more real knowledge of the beneficent history of the New Testament than
if he had been bred among idolaters. There was a legion of Sundays, all days of unserviceable bitterness and mortification,
slowly passing before him.
‘Beg pardon, sir,’ said a brisk waiter, rubbing the table. ‘Wish see bed-room?’
‘Yes. I have just made up my mind to do it.’
‘Chaymaid!’ cried the waiter. ‘Gelen box num seven wish see room!’
‘Stay!’ said Clennam, rousing himself. ‘I was not thinking of what I said; I answered mechanically.
I am not going to sleep here. I am going home.’
‘Deed, sir? Chaymaid! Gelen box num seven, not go sleep here, gome.’
He sat in the same place as the day died, looking at the dull houses opposite, and thinking, if the disembodied spirits
of former inhabitants were ever conscious of them, how they must pity themselves for their old places of imprisonment.
Sometimes a face would appear behind the dingy glass of a window, and would fade away into the gloom as if it had seen
enough of life and had vanished out of it. Presently the rain began to fall in slanting lines between him and those
houses, and people began to collect under cover of the public passage opposite, and to look out hopelessly at the sky as
the rain dropped thicker and faster. Then wet umbrellas began to appear, draggled skirts, and mud. What the mud had been
doing with itself, or where it came from, who could say? But it seemed to collect in a moment, as a crowd will,
and in five minutes to have splashed all the sons and daughters of Adam. The lamplighter was going his rounds now;
and as the fiery jets sprang up under his touch, one might have fancied them astonished at being suffered to introduce
any show of brightness into such a dismal scene.
